---
layout: page
title: Social Media and an Ulysses Pact
date: 2026-04-18
---



<span style="color: #48474c; font-family: 'Montserrat', 'Cardo', serif; font-weight: 700; letter-spacing: 0.04em; font-size: 1.1em;">Thought</span>: Do you know what's common between a 19-year-old posting a story about their post-workout meal on instagram and a 49-year-old Indian uncle madly blaring horns on the streets of New Delhi? 1. Both involve two people pushing a button to desperately tell a world that doesn't care— "I exist". 2. Both occur more frequently than one would like to imagine.

Dear gentle reader,

Know this: if you can hold a plank for a duration that is longer than your attention span, there is indeed something _special_ about you. Either you have a _very_ strong core, and if that's the case then I say good for you because that pilates class finally seems to be working (or is it the protein shakes?), OR you've messed up with your brain in ways that even science is just beginning to comprehend. If you find yourself to be alive at the time of writing, the odds weigh overwhelmingly in favour of the second possibility. Don't believe me? Plank. Now.

Now maybe you say– well of course Priya we've heard this before, but it's not easy for Belle to leave the castle once she's fallen in love with the beast, and maybe the beast isn't even a _real_ beast but just royalty trapped in a fortress of his own, and to that I say buddy _you do you_ even if that means being _delulu_. But if you, like me, are seeking some sanity in a world full of delusions and distractions, here's my two cents for you. Here’s my experience of downloading the instagram app and deleting it within 48 hours because I couldn't, _wouldn't_, stand it.

Last weekend, I created an instagram account for the first time in my life (a little late to the party as a person who is technically Gen Z and in their twenties at the time of writing?). The move wasn't spontaneous but well deliberated. As an ~~artist~~ novice who is just beginning to find her voice and figuring out how to be heard amid all the cacophony, social media (or instagram in particular) is the perfect siren. It beckons to you with all its all-to-perfect promises of finding a platform, a community, or at the very least, not feeling left out (FOMO, YOLO what are they calling it these days?) and like every foolish fisherman, you follow. So the siren called and I answered by creating an insta account through my web browser and making a couple posts about loosely written _shayari_ (couplets) that I had written from time to time over the past year. Mind you, we haven’t gotten to the app yet. Just my humble browser so far.

The day after I created an account on instagram, two friends who have been part of my closest circle of comrades for as long as I can remember, texted me about their surprise of me having _done it_. I have to say, I was both a little amused and mildly offended that it got the reaction which, in my opinion, should have only been reserved for me deciding to voluntarily get high (it has never happened). Or perhaps those in the trenches of social engagement do truly regard those who choose to forego it as social failures. (That is a badge I would happily don– to date some of my favourite words from any human ever remain—_it is no measure of health to be well-adjusted to a profoundly sick society_, by Jiddu Krishnamurty. But we digress.) In any case, I conveyed my amusement to my friends, told them how googling ‘how to make a post on instagram’ in 2026 made me feel older, chuckled to myself, and soldiered on.

As someone who got onto this beloved app of billions so late, the multitude of customisable settings seemed confusing. The only thing clear to me after two days of experimentation was this—their website _sucks_. I am not going into the details of what errors and inconveniences I encountered as I forged my way through, but you are welcome to be my guest and try. And this is not coming from a technologically incompetent boomer complaining about technology 101s, but from someone who codes for a living as part of her job (with a lot of help from AI of course ;). Long story short, I can figure out websites if they are well made, and the one I found myself on certainly wasn't.

So on a Monday evening, as I geared myself to post yet another shayari, I had two options. Grapple with the website as I had done for two days or download the instagram app (does Gen Alpha know that app is short for application?). Well, the app in question has been around for most of my adolescent and young-adult years, and like all things that most humans are hyped up about, I have always been a little suspicious of it. What can I say, that's how the cynical mind works. You see the herd joyously heading towards the grass and you're convinced there's a wolf lurking behind it. I've always believed that while it's possible the makers of social media may have had as noble intentions as it is possible for a bunch of college dropouts to have, all of those intentions have been forgotten along the way to the extent that what remains now is only a cadaver of the original idea taxidermied with capitalism. A lot of CAPITALISM (see what I did there?).

But no matter how suspicious a cynic, she must sometimes succumb to the general incompetence of web developers. (Or maybe it's not their incompetence after all but capitalism at play again because they really, _desperately_ want you to have the app that helps them make billions. See? I am a cynic). And so one fine Monday evening in April 2026, I found myself downloading the app with a pout on my face. And then? A whole new world. No, that sounds too positive. A whole new rabbit's hole. That's more like it.

Social media engineers and designers—I cannot overstate what a fantastic job you've done in turning us all into lab rats. What can I say? That the design, the colours, the way whole interface orgasms upon the gentle touch of your fingers is so well thought of? That you, some of the smartest people in the world, have managed to create something that is making the rest of humanity, possibly including you, all the dumber? I could rave on about this, but chances are, that you know all this already and there's nothing new for you there. What I _can_ tell from my experience with the Pandora's box is that even though I didn't scroll a single reel and mostly minded my business by posting my _shayari_ and taking a quick look at some friends’ stories, I could _feel_ my brain chemistry changing. Okay that very clearly is an euphemism, but you know what I mean. I could _feel_ the urge to back on the app and… and do what? Honestly I don't know. It wasn't a need to do anything in particular but more of a need to do _something_. As I said, I didn't scroll a single reel so it's not like 48 hours (more like two evenings) somehow turned me into an addict. But I could feel that if I stayed on this path, the only destination was turning into one _bit by bit_. And the odds were that if I wasn't observant enough of my behavioural patterns as I generally am, I wouldn't even know that it had happened.

And so after 48 hours of experimenting with the siren and almost jumping off the ship of sanity, I made an Ulysses pact. To the unaware, Ulysses was a Greek hero who also once found himself aboard a ship that encountered a siren as it sailed. He knew that men often gave in to the siren’s beckoning when they found themselves in such a predicament and to prevent that fate from befalling him, he asked his companions to tie him to the mast so that he could still listen to the siren's song without risking his life in a moment of error. (That had better have been a _really_ good song). Inspired by this story, an Ulysses pact refers to a self-binding pact made of one's free will, in acknowledgement of the fact that adverse or enticing circumstances often rob one of one's rationality. Or as the hindi poet Dinkar so wisely said in _Rashmirathi_—जब नाश मनुज पर छाता है, पहले विवेक मर जाता है।

And so, acknowledging that even the most rational and strong-willed people can be swayed when it comes to enduring the callous enticements that the capitalistic machinery sends our way—my Ulysses pact to me is to delete the app, but keep the account. This means that every time I have to post my _shayari_, I have to go use my laptop (the pact includes no phone access). Remember how they say social media exploits some of the most crude vulnerabilities of humans such as the need for social approval? In answer to that I have placed my bets on another fact about humans that I _know_ to be true—**human beings are one lazy species**. And as a proud member of the species _sapiens_—so am I. Which means going through the extra effort of leaving the warm cocoon of my blanket, finding my laptop, finding the charger, establishing a working connection between the charger and the laptop and the charger and the socket, waiting for windows to boot, waiting for the terrible wifi to be available, then giving up and reaching out for LAN cable, opening the browser and waiting for it to reload, logging on to insta, and _then_ making a post leaves little room for addiction. The hope is that, much like Ulysses, I would still be able to listen to the song of the siren at my will without falling prey to it in moments without clarity.

So yeah, my plan is to combat years of research into reward circuits and app optimization with human laziness. Genius, isn't it? XD

---

<div align="right">
— {{ page.date | date: "%B %-d, %Y" }}
</div>

